**Abstract:** *Combining aural and visual elements of a place can be a
powerful way of exploring the intersections of time, history and
geographical features that exist within a location. One way of combining
these elements is through sound mapping and cartophony, where spatial
and physical information is used as a way of representing an
individual\'s surroundings and realities of a place, and particularly
highlighting personal associations, emotions and memories*. *This paper
details the author\'s processes in incorporating place into
compositional practice through a combination of field recordings and
sonification, in relation to the author\'s work, The Lost (2021) - an
audio-visual contemplation of the sensation of loss and the subsequent
feelings of dislocation, and how these feelings related to the artist\'s
own life experiences at the time. The Lost is a work partly based on a
map of Perth from 1838, detailing many of Perth\'s now-lost wetlands.
This map was then sonified using Iannix (a graphical sequencer), and the
sounds were processed and combined in Ableton Live (a Digital Audio
Workstation) with a field recording from the still-existing Herdman\'s
Lake and sonified longitudinal and latitude values of these lost
wetlands. The Lost is an exploration of connections between artist,
history and place, and how these aspects can inform the creation of a
work. Through this practice, the author aims to explore how sound and
visual elements can combine and resonate with the other, and how such a
practice can highlight the connections between artist and place.*

Combining aural and visual elements of a place can be a powerful way of
exploring the intersections of time, history and geographical features
that exist within a location. A challenge for site-specific works is
situating sources of information (chiefly, combining visual and aural
information) and weaving them into a multi-layered narrative within a
piece of work. The combination of sound and images can provide a
multi-sensory experience of place for people, and also allows for the
convergence of geographical and cultural aspects.

One way of displaying this information is through sound mapping, which
brings together both visual and sonic practices together to create a
richer understanding of place and space. Sound mapping is a practice
that utilises sound - most commonly in the form of field recordings - as
a way of weaving a commentary about the physicality and cultural
associations of a place. Sound mapping is often combined with visual
representations of a place as a way of establishing greater context for
audiences. Soundmaps \"can be graphic, conceptual, multimodal or digital
artefacts that represent sonic locales in different ways, anchoring
sonic information such as type, content, characteristics, and
relationships between sounds on spatial representations of space\"
(Anderson, 2016).

This paper will be presented in three parts, starting with an
introduction to place and self-reflexive practices in music composition,
followed by a broad overview of what sound mapping and cartophony means,
and finally moving onto a discussion on one of my works influenced by
these concepts titled *The Lost (2021)*.

### Introduction

Landscapes can invoke deep and visceral emotions within artists, often
acting as a conduit for creative inspiration. Being immersed within a
place can be a powerful experience, with past and present memories
constantly intersecting as an individual traverses a place. The act of
immersion into a landscape can lead to the creation of multiple forms of
dialogue - firstly, within the artist themselves as they process
thoughts and emotions a landscape triggers within them, then secondly
between the artist and the landscape as they forge navigational methods
over the land\'s geography.

Any discussion of place requires unpacking of the meaning of \'place\',
and how such a definition can be applicable universally. In the simplest
sense, place is used to refer to either a location or the occupation of
said location, differentiated from the concept of \'space\' due to its
increased specificity. Beyond that though, creating more nuanced and
detailed definitions can be difficult at best, with multiple attempts at
conceptualising what place means. The idea of \'place\' covers cultural,
social and personal expectations, as well as geographic boundaries and
shapes. Some attempts to acknowledge and incorporate these myriad
aspects include John Agnew\'s definition of place as a threefold
process - physical place (as a location), relationship of a site to its
spatial boundaries (the locale), and the cognitive and physical
interactions between human and site (sense of place)(Agnew, 1987).

Edward Relph offers a similar definition of place, conceptualising place
as a \"centres of our immediate experiences of the world\" (Relph,
1976). This definition of place acknowledges the immediacy in which
\'place\' is felt by an individual. If a \'place\' can be defined as
physical areas that play host to our experiences, then by extension it
acts as a framework to understand place-specific and place-inspired
works, which strive to replicate, represent and perhaps even invoke
these levels of experience.

The landscape shapes much of the human experience of the land - for
instance, in the ways in which we use physical demarcations and
descriptions for place, and also how we determine our movements within
these boundaries. Much has been written about landscape and the human
experience, particularly in regards to psychological and spiritual
connections and landscape as a cultural construct. How a landscape is
interpreted is heavily dependent on cultural context, or as Simon Schama
describes, "\...constructions of the imagination projected onto wood and
water and rock" (Schama, 1995).

In essence, there is a broad duality in how landscape can be viewed -
both as an entity to be seen by those experiencing a place, and also as
a way of perceiving the world (Wylie, 2007). This concept of perceiving
acknowledges the ways in which landscape engages the senses, as well as
its emotional affect. Denis Cosgrove, a prominent human geographer,
notes:

*In other words landscape denotes the external world mediated through
subjective human experience in a way that neither regions nor area
immediately suggest. Landscape is not merely the world we see, it is a
construction, the composition of the world. Landscape is a way of seeing
the world* (Cosgrove, 1984, p. 13).

In terms of sound composition, artists have often been inspired by
place, creating scores that emulated sounds from both natural and human
environments. The advent of recording technology meant that artists were
now also able to bring entire soundscapes from one area to another,
through field recordings. Regarding the availability of recording
technology, British composer David Toop noted how this changed the way
composers could relate to sound and place: \"The fact that these noises
also began existing as recordings suggested you could use them as they
were - not by imitating them with an oboe, but by actually bringing in
the sounds themselves\" (Nichols, 2017). Being able to bring recordings
into works also changed the interaction between the listener and place,
through developing greater awareness of sounds that occur. Toop
continues:

> *It's a framing of listening within a particular setting, where you'd
> normally expect to hear music that's deliberately separate from the
> environment: a shocking gesture in one sense. But in another, it
> forces the audience to listen to the world around them, and consider
> those noises as performance (Nichols, 2017).*

The idea of how composers can relate to sound and place can also extend
to the process field recording itself, and the narratives existing
within the recordist. Field recording have largely been perceived as
recording-as-documentation or as a process of gathering sonic material,
with the focus being on capturing impartial and neutral artifacts of
soundscapes. The narratives that exist within the recordist, however,
have been generally less acknowledged. Isobel Anderson and Tullis Rennie
noted in their article, *Thoughts in the Field: Self-reflexive narrative
in field recording*, where they discussed notions around narrative in
field recording and outlined the importance of personal narrative:

> *These narrative details should certainly not automatically be
> silenced, repressed, or redated, which are common conventions within
> the practice. Instead, these insights can become some of the most
> interesting and creative elements of field recordings, both
> strengthening the field recording artist\'s understanding of their
> practice and providing greater potential engagement for
> listeners\...The meaning of the sounds within these recordings may
> have a personal significance to their recordist, which may bring
> greater meaning to the overall soundscape for the listener, if
> divulged (Anderson and Rennie, 2016).*

Field recordist Steven Feld echoes a similar sentiment about his work.
For Feld, there is a sense of deep embodiment in his recordings - a
presence of his existence as listener, even though his presence might
not always be clearly audible to audiences. Feld explains that:

> *I am always part of my recordings. I can always listen to my
> recordings and recover my breath, my bodily presence\...the recording
> is always the audible trace of my presence as a listener. My
> recordings are always an archive of my history of listening and of the
> history of listening that is being recorded. You could say that my
> field-recording praxis is to listen to histories of listening. That is
> why I am always part of the recording, always present in some way even
> if that presence is not audibly legible to the listener. (Feld,
> in\...)*

Sound is therefore a powerful medium for artists to reflect upon their
personal reflections of place - the history, the geography, and their
own emotive responses. Sound can be the conduit for mediating knowledge
and imagination - where concepts of landscape, place and meaning can be
situated together. For instance, the contours and resonances of the land
can be captured and expressed through field recordings, i.e. the rushing
cascade of water onto rocks, the wind through trees, and the animal
sounds highlighting its inhabitants. The history of a place can be
alluded to through using fragments of historical texts, or by
manipulating field recordings to evoke the past. All these aspects can
then be used by the artist in the creation of artefacts that channel
these emotions and memories.

There have been several composers who have explored field recordings as
a form of self-reflexive narrative, such as Luc Ferrari\'s *Presque
Rien* series, where Ferrari weaves narration over field recordings.
Ferrari\'s first foray, *Presque rien, ou le lever du jour au bord de la
mer (Almost nothing, or daybreak at the seashore)*, recorded in Vela
Luka, Croatia and released in 1970, was an early demonstration of a
field recording being used both as a part of composition and and as
auditory memory making.

While in Vela Luka, Ferrari spent several weeks exploring the village
and surrounds with his partner, Brunhild Meyer Ferrari. As they explored
the area, Ferrari became increasingly drawn to the sonic environment and
his responses to what was happening, and recorded for several mornings.
As noted by Lawrence English in his essay about the work, \"In Presque
Rien No. 1, Ferrari perceived that his listening, as an affective and
agentive performance within a given horizon, was not absolute or
ongoing, but rather highly selective in attentiveness and temporality\"
(English, 2017).

Two other artists who have explored field recordings and self-reflexive
narrative are Hildegard Westerkamp and Janet Cardiff. Both artists have
created work that interwove narration over field recording as a way of
explaining to listeners the personal significance of an area for them.
In their works, listening is also an act of combining multiple streams
of information of place - sonic, spatial and social - into the creation
of a work.

Westerkamp\'s *Kits Beach Soundwalk* is a work where Westerkamp explores
her affinity with Vancouver\'s Kits Beach through a combination of field
recordings and Westerkamp\'s spoken contemplations. Westerkamp's
narration during the work highlights the active role she undertook in
capturing and reflecting on the soundscape. One point of particular
interest with *Kits Beach Soundwalk* is how Westerkamp openly sign-posts
to listeners her manipulations in the studio during post-production,
such as informing audience she is diminishing the sound of traffic to
amplify the sound of the ocean because the view is \"...beautiful. In
fact, it is spectacular\" (Anderson and Rennie, 2016).

In a similar vein to Westerkamp, Cardiff also establishes herself within
soundscape recordings through her series of soundwalk compositions,
where she narrates over a composed soundscape. In works such as *A Large
Slow River (2000)*, Cardiff uses Lake Ontario as a setting for
discussing memory and time, and particularly how certain geographical
features of place act as triggers for personal history. *A Large Slow
River* directs listeners along a certain, specific route, and during the
soundwalk, listeners are encouraged to explore and engage with the
historical, cultural and natural aspects of place. In some passages,
Cardiff\'s narration is evocative in its shifting of temporality from
past to present as a demonstration of the multi-layered nature of place.
For instance, in one passage Cardiff narrates over the sound of crashing
waves: "I'm at a beach on Lake Huron, my toes squishing into the
mud...jumping off my father's wet shoulders into the water. Now I'm at
another beach, it's night, the sound of the waves coming in through the
screen windows" (Cardiff, accessed September 1 2019).

Another sound artist who draws upon self-reflexive practices is Iain
Findlay-Walsh who also draws on autoethnography in his compositional
practice. Findlay-Walsh describes his practice as a form of sonic
autoethnography, where soundscape composition is explored as a form of
self-narrative. He notes one of the benefits of incorporating
self-reflection into his work alongside recording and composition:

> *\...has resulted in a focus on some aspects which are not usually
> emphasized in electroacoustic practice or the discourse around it.
> These include attending to the situational aspects of sound recording,
> pursuing extremes of self-reference, developing layered spatial
> narratives, oscillating between documentary and aesthetic aims and
> functions, and producing rhetorical reception situations which
> conflate recording, composing and listening roles. (Findlay-Walsh,
> 2017, p 121)*

Dee Heddon describes a similar sentiment of viewing field recordings as
a way of narrating the links between site and self for the recordist.
Heddon describes this act of narrating self while in place
\'autotopography\', as self-narration ultimately depends on the
perspective of the artist - both physically and metaphorically. In
*Autobiography and Performance*, Heddon explains:

> *\"In thinking about performances that fold or unfold autobiography
> and place, particularly outside places, I have conceptualised them as
> being autotopographic, a neologism used for more than its fleeting
> illusion to autobiographic\...\[the word\] intends to foreground the
> subjectivity involved in plotting place; autotopography is writing
> place through self (and simultaneously writing self through
> place)\...\[it\] is a creative act of seeing, interpretation and
> invention, all of which depend on where you are standing, when and for
> what purpose.*\" (Heddon, ).

While self-narration over compositions is one way artist can create
autotopographic works, another way where an artist can integrate place
into self-reflection is through sound mapping. The practice describes
the combination of cartographic (i.e. geospatial information, sometimes
presented as a cartographic map and other times through other means such
as photographs) and sound activities (i.e. through field recordings) as
a way of exploring place. Through this combination, the layers of time,
history, and artist present within a place can be represented across
both visual and aural domains.

### Sound Mapping

A challenge for site-specific works is situating multiple sources of
information (chiefly, combining visual and aural information) and
weaving them into a multi-layered narrative within a piece of work. The
combination of sound and images can provide a multi-sensory experience
of place for people, and also allows for the convergence of geographical
and cultural aspects. One way of displaying this information is through
sound mapping, which brings together both visual and sonic practices
together to create a richer understanding of place and space. Sound
mapping is a practice that utilises sound - most commonly in the form of
field recordings - as a way of weaving a commentary about the
physicality and cultural associations of a place. Sound mapping is often
combined with visual representations of a place as a way of establishing
greater context for audiences. Soundmaps \"can be graphic, conceptual,
multimodal or digital artefacts that represent sonic locales in
different ways, anchoring sonic information such as type, content,
characteristics, and relationships between sounds on spatial
representations of space\" (Droumeva 2017, p 337).

Before further discussion about the concept of sound mapping, it is
important to consider how a \'map\' is defined. The common view of a
\'map\' is a series of lines in gridded fashion that accurately plots
physical and spatial features onto a piece of paper or a screen. On a
broader level, mapping is also about representing an individual\'s
surroundings and realities of a place, and particularly highlighting the
personal associations, emotions and memories a person has in their
relationships with a place\'s physical and spatial features (Anderson
2016). From this perspective, maps can also be viewed as a subjective
abstraction of place, overlaying imagined landscapes with geographical
features.

One example of sound-mapping being used to convey narrative is
*Sailortown*, a project by Anderson and Fionnuala Fagan, which was based
around the old dockside part of Belfast, Ireland. For Anderson, the
project highlighted how place, history and lived history can be deeply
intertwined - once a bustling, close-knit community, most of Sailortown
was demolished in 1962 as part of the M2 motorway development. This
project combined photographs of the area, with recordings from residents
discussing their memories of Sailortown prior to the development.
Through this project, Anderson and Fagan found themselves uncovering
lost buildings and landmarks through these personal stories. Anderson
noted the project also, \"\...voiced great feelings of loss and
bereavement. It had been extremely difficult to accept the disappearance
of Sailortown from Belfast's physical and psychological landscape, when
at one time it had been their home\" (Anderson, 2016).

A term that can be used to describe this combination of cartographic and
sonic activities is cartophony. Cartophony describes the dialogue that
occurs when mapping practices and sound intersect, and the ways in which
these intersections occur. In his discussion about cartophony, Samuel
Thulin noted that one of the forms of cartophony was *sound-as-map*.
Thulin described these types of maps as a sonic form of cartography,
where the practice is, \"\...based on the richness of spatial and
locational information that can be attained through listening\" (Thulin,
2016).

A common approach to sound mapping is by attaching field recordings to
geographic coordinates via online maps, such as Google Maps (Thulin
2016). These projects often contain a collaborative aspect as a way for
visitors to explore the relationships between place and cultural
identity, either inviting audiences to modify these recordings, or even
contributing their own recordings to the project. An example of the
former was *Folk Songs for the Five Points* (2005), a project created
through the Tenement Museum\'s Digital Artists Residence program in New
York, USA. In this project, visitors to the website were able to explore
an interactive map of New York\'s Lower East Side. Overlaid on the map
were a number of dots that represented locally-recorded audio samples.
Using a selection tool on the side of the map, visitors were able to
remix, create and share their own musical pieces using these samples. An
example of the latter is the *Cities and Memory Project*, a
collaborative sound project where contributions are encouraged from
around the world. *Cities and Memory* pairs up two sounds of place - the
original field recording, and a reimagined soundscape based upon the
original field recording.

While sound maps can be used to document place on a literal level (i.e.
documenting how a geographic location looks and sounds), they can also
be used to examine the relationship between people, place and
temporality through techniques such as layering sounds, all the while
using geographic and spatial aspects of place as the base of works. Such
an approach allows for a broader approach to place, where real and
imagined sonic geographies can move within and from each other.

Thulin describes five methods of sound mapping, two which are relevant
to this paper: *sound-as-map* and *map-into-sound*. Regarding
sound-as-map Thulin observes that these works have a, \"thorough
engagement with acoustic aspects of places, often exploring an
aurally-orientated \'deep mapping\' that layers multiple aspects of
place\". *Map-into-sound* is the sonification of certain aspects of
maps, whereby aspects such as visual and geospatial information are
turned into sound through the process of sonification. With this
approach, the main intention is not to represent sounds found in an
area, but rather to use sound as a way of communicating various
information found on a map.

For Thulin, *sound-as-map* have a \"thorough engagement with acoustic
aspects of places, often exploring an aurally-orientated \'deep
mapping\' that layers multiple aspects of place\" (Thulin 2016, p 196).
Often these works contain one of, or a multiple of the following - a
collection of sounds spread over a specific geographical area, and using
visitor\'s movements through sites (aka soundwalks) where their
movements are integral to the work.

An example of *sound-as-map* is Annea Lockwood\'s various works based on
river systems. For instance, in *Sound Map of the Hudson River (1982),*
Lockwood aimed to communicate the trajectory of the river through sound
by recording the river along 15 locations and documenting the various
permutations of the river through its journey. In a later piece based on
the Danube River titled *A Sound Map of the Danube* *(2005)*, Lockwood
wanted to record both the river itself, and the populace that lived
along its banks, noting that, \"I decided in advance of recording that
this time I would acknowledge this interdependence \[of river and
river-dwellers\] by merging voice and river sounds\" (Lockwood, in Nagia
2015). Lockwood expressed her desire to highlight this interdependence
in an earlier piece of writing on the process of making the work:

*The people I spoke with along the river came to seem as deeply a part
of the river\'s being as the geese and the herons, aquatic beetles,
carp, alder and willows\...here the voices are integrated into the
mix\...(Lockwood 2007, p 43).*

*A Sound Map of the Danube* features 59 sites, each of them either on,
or near the river. The work combines field recordings taken from these
sites, alongside interviews by Lockwood where interviewees were asked,
\'What does the river mean to you?\' (Lockwood, in Nagia 2015). The
album version of the work groups these sites into various tracks, which
are marked on an included map (also containing translations from all
interviews), but without time references. When listening to this work,
there is a sense of moving along and with the river, while it winds
through the landscape.

An interesting aspect about the work is that Lockwood also focuses on
the river as its own entity - one with its own sense of agency. The work
ultimately is also about the river itself, asserting its identity.
Lockwood notes the point where she made this observation:

*Way down in Russolo, Bulgaria, towards the end of the final field
recording trip, we found a mud bank hollowed into an almost complete
tube - producing marvellously resonant sounds - and I suddenly realised
that the river has agency; it shapes its sounds itself by the way it
scupts its banks. It composes itself.* (Lockwood 2007, p 44)

*Map-into-sound* is the sonification of certain aspects of maps, whereby
aspects such as visual and geospatial information are represented by
sound. With this approach, the main intention is not to represent sounds
found in an area, but rather to use sound as a way of communicating
various information found on a map.

An example of this is the *Cybercartographic Atlas of Antarctica*
project by Caquard, S. et al, created as a digital, interactive resource
for exploring Antarctica, and in particular the convergence between the
landscape and human exploration. In this project, sound was used as a
way of exploring and representing geospatial information. For instance,
one section of the map which explored the research stations present on
the continent, features the following sounds to accentuate the
information: \"\...a loose depiction of three intersecting components:
an exterior frontier (represented by the high-pitched sound of cold
winds whistling across a plain); the human-made interior space of a
research station (represented by the muffled rumble of winds buffeting a
small, enclosed acoustic space); and intermittent bursts of short wave
radio activity\" (Caquard S. et al, p 14).

Sound mapping and cartophony, therefore, allows for a method for
creatively interrogating the relationships between sound and map, in its
broadest definition as a visual representation of place and memory. Not
only is there a recreation of geography, but there is also a recreation
of the cultural aspects of place. Thulin describes this as, \"An
expanded approach to phonography, one that takes in all sounds and their
possible transformations, sits well with the critical and creative
approaches to mapping that recognise the malleability and relationality
of cartographic forms\" (Thulin, 2016).

### The Lost

During the course of my practice, I have become increasingly preoccupied
with exploring methods of incorporating place and self-reflection into
work. I have been particularly intrigued by the concepts behind
autotopography and cartophony, as both offer pathways to explore the
personal through place. My recent practice has involved combining
documentation of place (through field recordings) with sonification of
geographical features (such as maps and geospatial information) as a way
of expressing the relationships between myself and place.

One of these such works is *The Lost (2021)*, an audio-visual work
contemplating the sensation of loss, and the subsequent feelings of
dislocation. The work is based on a map of Perth from 1838, detailing
many of Perth\'s former wetlands (since lost to in-filling and
development), which I sonified into an autonomous instrument using
Iannix. This sonified map was combined with a field recording from
Herdman\'s Lake - one of the remaining remnants of these wetlands - and
sonified longitudinal and latitude values of where some of these lost
wetlands would have been located.

*The Lost* was initially inspired by a friend\'s comment about how some
of Perth\'s lakes were connected before parts were filled in, which made
me explore more about how Perth appeared prior colonisation. Another
catalyst for *The Lost* was the experience of losing multiple people in
my life over the course of a year, and I wanted to find a way to process
and express that sense of dislocation through a composition. What drew
me to using the lost wetlands was the idea that something that had
existed at one point was no longer there, but for fragments - such as
memories and remnants - which resonated strongly with my personal
experience of loss.

As a way to embed the geographical features of place into the
composition, I decided to sonify a map through rendering the image into
an autonomous musical instrument. To begin the process of creating the
work, I took a screenshot of the map from 1838 (figure 1).

\[insert figure 1\]

Figure 1. A map of Perth circa 1838, showing the wetlands. (Perth
Wetlands Map, 2011).

For the autonomous instrument, I used a program called Iannix (an
open-sourced, real-time graphical sequencer, based on composer Iannis
Xenakis\'s visual approach to composition) to trace the map into the
program. Iannix can be used to create an autonomous instrument where
lines and curves can be played using cursors and triggers, with the
horizontal positioning of these triggers corresponding to pitch, so the
lines and curves of the map became the basis for the triggers and
cursors that would operate the instrument - a note would sound as each
cursor (in red) moved across a trigger (white dots).

Figure 2 shows how the piece appears in Iannix. The program features
line and shape tools which allow users to draw images into the program.
On the left side are options to change the speed and size of the
cursors, the behaviour - such as the movement of the cursors, ranging
from steady, linear forward movement to more pendulum movements - and
also looping patterns and gaps between loops. All these options combined
can give the autonomous instrument variety in sound, as each cursor is
interacting differently in the space.

\[insert figure 2\]

Figure 2. How the rendered map appears in Iannix (author supplied).

I also thought of other ways of incorporating place into the work. One
of the ways was to include a field recording that I recorded at Herdsman
Lake, which is one of the remaining remnants of the wetlands system. I
wanted to use a field recording as a way of aurally anchoring the
listener to place, by giving listeners an aural touchstone of what, and
where they were listening.

Another way of incorporating place was to consult the Gnarla Boodja Mili
Mili map to see where some of vanished lakes would have existed in
relation to modern-day Perth, then turning the latitude and longitude
values into hertz via Adobe Audition\'s tone tool. For the map of the
wetlands, I turned to an interactive map of the Perth CBD called Gnarla
Boodja Mili Mili (figure 3), made to map Noongar places of significance.
For the purposes of this work, it was very useful because it provided an
overlay of a map of Perth from 1838 with modern-day Perth, and this
overlay gave a very clear idea of where the lost lakes used to exist.

\[insert figure 3\]

Figure 3. A map of Perth from 1838 overlaid on a map of current-day
Perth, from Gnarla Boodja Mili Mili. (Department of Local Government,
Sport, and Cultural Industries (n.d.)).

I combined all these sounds together in Ableton Live, a digital audio
workstation that allows for composition and audio editing. To link
Iannix and Ableton together, so that I could use Iannix to run a virtual
synth, I used LoopBe1, a free virtual MIDI driver that allows the
transfer of MIDI data between programs.

An important component of making the Iannix instrument was selecting the
type of virtual instrument that would be driving the sound, as the sound
of the sonified is both supporting and complementing the work as a
whole. One of the challenges of sonification is answering the question,
\"What does this sound represent?\" For *The Lost*, I wanted to give the
Iannix instrument a sound that would highlight the fragility of place
and memory. The sound I ultimately chose was one that was bright, but
also brittle and with a hint of echo.

\[insert figure 4\]

Figure 4. A still image of *The Lost.* (author supplied).

The completed piece (figure 4) features the sonified map as the visual
element of the work, with the piece beginning with an interplay of the
map with the field recording from Lake Herdsman to establish place for
the listener. As the piece unfolds, it becomes increasingly abstract and
dark, with the field recording also warping - which I used a combination
of echo and reverb effects to achieve. The piece also gradually
introduces the sonified latitude and longitude coordinates, which
introduces a level of dissonance into the sound. This culminates around
the middle of the piece where the sonified longitude coordinates are
playing together and are just slightly different from each other enough
to create a pulsating beat. I wanted this effect to create a sense of
dislocation that can happen from loss - a paradoxical feeling that time
is both standing still yet moving.

The full piece can be heard here: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5596343

### Concluding thoughts

The nature of place, and the relationship between place and artist, can
be complex. These relationships are coloured by the interplay of various
external and internal elements - the physical features of the place, its
culture and history (and the symbolism and imagery these invoke), and
the emotional and creative responses by the artist. Through exploring
and acknowledging the experiences of the composer as a key compositional
component in the creative process, there is potential for deeper
emotional connections between place and work.

One of the ways in which to reflect these complexities is through
audio-visual works, where sound and structure can be deeply intertwined
within a composition. I believe that this approach to composition, where
multiple elements of place are incorporated into a work - and
particularly where the physicality of place can be incorporated as an
active part in the creation of the soundscape - can be a valuable way of
exploring the history, geographical aspects and personal connections to
place. *The Lost* was a work that not only allowed me a sense of
catharsis about my personal experiences, but also allowed me to explore
a relatively overlooked part of Perth history in its former wetlands.
This method of approaching composition offers a multi-layered
perspective of place where various perspectives can co-exist, and
encourages a greater engagement from both artist and audience within an
area.

### Bibliography

Agnew, J.A. (2011). \"Space and Place\" in J. Agnew and D. Livingstone
eds., Handbook of Geographical Knowledge, London: Sage.

Anderson, I. (2015). Soundmapping beyond the grid: Alternative
cartographies of sound. *Journal of Sonic Studies*, 11.

Anderson, I. and Rennie, T. (2016) \'Thoughts in the Field:
\'Self-reflexive narrative\' in field recording\'*.* *Organised Sound*,
Vol 21, Special Issue 3, pp. 222-232.

Caquard, S., Brauen, G., Wright, B. and Jasen, P. (2008) Designing sound
in cybercartography: from structured cinematic narratives to
unpredictable sound/image interactions. *International Journal of
Geographical Information Science*.

Cardiff, J. (n.d.) *A Large Slow River*.
https://cardiffmiller.com/walks/a-large-slow-river/

Cosgrove, D. (1984) *Social formation and symbolic landscape*. Madison,
Wis: University of Wisconsin Press.

Department of Local Government, Sport, and Cultural Industries (n.d.)
Gnarla Boodja Mili Mili (Our Country on Paper)

[[https://www.dlgsc.wa.gov.au/department/publications/publication/gnarla-boodja-mili-mili-(our-country-on-paper)]{.underline}](https://www.dlgsc.wa.gov.au/department/publications/publication/gnarla-boodja-mili-mili-(our-country-on-paper))

Droumeva, M. (2017). Soundmapping as critical cartography: Engaging
publics in listening to the environment. *Communication and the Public*,
Vol. 2(4) 335--351.

English, L. (2017). A Memory of Almost Nothing: Luc Ferrari\'s Listening
During Presque Rien No. 1. *Leonardo Music Journal*, Vol 27, 17-20.

Findlay-Walsh, I. (2017). Sonic Autoethnographies: Personal listening as
compositional context. *Organised Sound*, Vol 23, 121-130.

Lockwood, A. (2007) What is a River. *Soundscape: The Journal of
Acoustic Ecology* 7(1).

Nagai, M. (2011) Listen Compose Listen: A study of perception, process
and the spaces between in two works made from listening. *Organised
Sound*, 16:3.

Relph, E. C. (1976). *Place and placelessness*. London: Pion.

Schama, S. (1995). *Landscape and Memory*. London: HarperCollin
Publishers.

Thulin, S. (2016). Sound Maps matter: expanding cartophony. *Social &
Cultural Geography*, 19:2.
